South Africa’s Transnet has announced that all eight commercial ports on the country’s coastline are now using Transnet National Ports Authority (TNPA)’s new R79m (US$5.5m) web-based Integrated Port Management System (IPMS), a project aiming to transform them into ‘smartPORTS’.
At the Port of Richards Bay, which was the last of the eight ports to use the system, the IPMS went live on November 26, 2015, three days after TNPA began registering port users onto the system network.
In addition to the Port of Richards Bay, the IPMS has been rolled out to the Ports of Durban, Cape Town, Saldanha, Port Elizabeth, Ngqura, East London and Mossel Bay over a four-month period begun in July 2015.
The new technology, which was developed by India-based Navayuga Infotech in collaboration with its South African partner Nambiti Technologies, replaces the manual processes used to monitor marine operations, vessel traffic services and terminal performance, and allows key port operations to be managed online and in real time across all the ports in the network.
Richard Vallihu, CEO of TNPA, said in a statement that the project aims to support in terms of efficiency and productivity the objectives of the Transnet Market Demand Strategy (MDS), a plan launched in 2012 to expand and modernise South Africa’s ports, rail and pipelines infrastructure.
He added: “This journey began in 2008 and is the culmination of various feasibility studies where we identified the need for an automated and web-based system to improve port operations, strengthen efficiencies and enhance competitiveness.”
Vallihu claimed that the IPMS represents the first time a system such as this is integrated across multiple ports on a single platform.
Preston Khomo, port manager at the Port of Richards Bay, said: “Apart from a technological competitive edge, IPMS will bolster transparency and efficiencies in the port while enabling business continuity for our customers, visitors and general stakeholders.”
Transnet recently signed a US$2.5bn funding guarantee agreement with China Export Credit Insurance Corporation (Sinosure).
According to the agreement, the South African company can use the money to buy mechanical, electrical products and equipment from Chinese enterprises, as well as to cover funding for operation, maintenance and other services from Chinese companies in South Africa.
The two companies agreed that the guarantee should be preferably used for ports, railway and pipeline projects in the country, with the possibility to extend it to other areas if they both agree.